--- Page 1 ---
1
Collaborative Orthogonal Learning for Constrained
Multi-Objective Optimization
Yubo Wang, Chengyu Hu, Xinyi Wu, Tingyu Zhang, Wenyin Gong, Senior Member, IEEE, Xuesong Yan,
Liang Gao, Senior Member, IEEE,
Abstract—Balancing feasibility, convergence, and diversity is a
fundamental challenge in constrained multi-objective optimiza-
tion, particularly in landscapes with irregular or disconnected
boundaries. Existing methods primarily exchange solution po-
sitions but neglect valuable convergence direction information
contained within the evolutionary process, which may lead to
inefficient and redundant searches for the constrained Pareto
front (CPF). To address this, we propose a dual-swarm com-
petitive optimizer with collaborative orthogonal learning (COL)
strategy, which effectively decouples global exploration and di-
versity exploitation. Specifically, the main swarm performs trend
learning to identify convergence directions from boundary and
winner-loser interaction information, enabling global exploration
through infeasible regions toward the CPF. Guided by the learned
trends, the auxiliary swarm executes orthogonal learning to
search complementary subspaces, which broadens the solution
distribution while avoiding redundant searches, ensuring diver-
sity exploitation capability. Additionally, a niche-guided subset
selection strategy is introduced to maintain uniform distribution
within the objective space through a three-level subset division
mechanism based on local niche capacity. Extensive experiments
on standard and extended benchmark instances demonstrate the
robustness and superiority of our approach over nine state-of-
the-art methods.
Index Terms—Constrained multi-objective optimization prob-
lems, global exploration, diversity exploitation, collaborative
orthogonal learning, niche-guided subset selection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
ONSTRAINED multi-objective optimization problems
(CMOPs) frequently arise in many real-world appli-
cations, such as job shop scheduling problems [1], circuit
design problem [2] and optimal power flow problems [3].
Unlike unconstrained optimization, the primary challenge in
solving CMOPs lies in balancing feasibility, convergence, and
diversity. This challenge is particularly difficult when handling
CMOPs with complex landscapes characterized by narrow,
disconnected, or irregular boundaries. Such complex land-
scapes often impede traditional constrained multi-objective
optimization evolutionary algorithms (CMOEAs), causing the
This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant Nos. 62073300 and 62576325, in part by the Engi-
neering Research Center of Natural Resource Information Management and
Digital Twin Engineering Software, Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430074,
China. (Corresponding author: Chengyu Hu.)
Yubo Wang, Chengyu Hu, Xinyi Wu, Tingyu Zhang, Wenyin Gong, and
Xuesong Yan are with the School of Computer Science, China University of
Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China. (Email: huchengyu@cug.edu.cn)
Liang Gao is with the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing
Equipment and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China.
population to be easily trapped in local feasible regions or fail
to cover the entire constrained Pareto front (CPF).
To tackle these challenges, numerous constraint-handling
techniques (CHTs) have been developed and incorporated
into evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [4]–[7]. Among them, the
constraint dominance principle (CDP) stands out as a classic
approach due to its simplicity and parameter-free nature [8].
However, when the problem contains large infeasible barriers
or disjoint feasible islands, CDP often leads to premature
convergence. To alleviate this, ε methods have gained popu-
larity [9], [10]. By dynamically relaxing constraint boundaries
through a threshold ε, these methods allow the population to
preserve high-quality infeasible solutions, thereby enabling the
traversal of infeasible regions to converge to the CPF. More
recently, multi-population and multi-tasking frameworks have
been proposed and widely utilized to decouple constraint sat-
isfaction and objective optimization [11]–[13]. The key feature
of these methods lies in equipping different populations with
distinct CHTs and assigning them different tasks, thereby en-
hancing algorithmic performance through knowledge transfer
between populations. Nevertheless, as reflected in the exper-
imental results in Section IV-B, existing approaches, despite
the integration of various advanced CHTs, often struggle to
maintain a satisfactory and comprehensive performance when
solving CMOPs with diverse landscapes. To systematically
address challenges arising from different types of problems,
we present the following analysis of the current studies.
• In many existing multi-population and multi-tasking
frameworks, knowledge transfer between populations is
primarily achieved by sharing the spatial coordinates of
high-quality solutions. While this approach effectively
transmits the locations of promising regions, it fails to
uncover and convey the potential beneficial convergence
directions within the evolutionary process that could help
populations converge and search more efficiently. When
handling problems with complex landscapes, the main
population may converge slowly, while the auxiliary pop-
ulations may perform redundant searches in the regions
explored by the main population. Hence, a direction-
guided collaborative framework is needed to decouple
global exploration and diversity exploitation.
• Even existing CMOEAs equipped with various advanced
CHTs still primarily rely on traditional reproduction
operators, such as differential evolution (DE) and genetic
algorithms (GA), to generate offspring. Their search
process is mainly driven by random neighborhood per-
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 2 ---
2
turbations around the current solutions, which may limit
algorithmic performance in CMOPs featuring expansive
search space landscapes. Therefore, there is significant
potential in extracting reusable search experience from
population evolution to form promising search directions
and guide more efficient evolution.
• Several CMOEAs tend to favor solutions with better
feasibility or convergence in their environment selection
[14], [15]. Although such preference facilitates rapid
convergence, it may also cause the population to converge
unidirectionally toward CPF in a clustered state, hinder-
ing the population’s ability to perform extensive searches.
When the feasible region is narrow and separated, such as
LIR-CMOP3, this strategy makes the population prone to
being trapped in local feasible regions, resulting in only a
small fraction of CPFs being searched. Thus, it is neces-
sary to maintain good distribution in the objective space
and promote uniform search across multiple directions.
Based on the above considerations, in this article, we
propose a dual-swarm optimizer with collaborative orthogonal
learning, named DSOCOL. Specifically, the main contribu-
tions of our research include the following.
1) A dual-swarm cooperative framework driven by evolu-
tionary direction learning is proposed to decouple the
conflicting tasks of convergence and diversity. Specifically,
the framework synergizes solution knowledge transfer with
evolutionary direction learning. The primary swarm pri-
marily focuses on rapidly converging to feasible regions
to localize the CPF, while the auxiliary swarm emphasizes
extensive exploitation of the objective space to enhance
uniform search for the CPF. By sharing both high-quality
offspring solutions and promising evolutionary directions,
the two swarms effectively collaborate to overcome chal-
lenges in CMOPs with complex landscapes.
2) A novel collaborative orthogonal learning (COL) strategy
is developed to synergize the search behaviors of the two
swarms. Instead of merely sharing the solutions, the main
swarm performs trend learning to extract promising con-
vergence directions by the solution status within different
niches and transmits them to the auxiliary swarm, ensuring
global exploration. The auxiliary swarm then executes
orthogonal learning based on these trends to explore com-
plementary subspaces, aiming to reduce redundant searches
and enhance diversity exploitation along the CPF.
3) A niche-guided subset selection strategy is designed for
environmental selection to handle irregular Pareto fronts.
By implementing a three-level subset division mechanism
based on local niche capacity, this strategy dynamically
regulates swarm density. The strategy ensures the ex-
ploration of sparse niches and effectively manages the
trade-off between local convergence and global diversity,
enhancing the capability to capture discrete CPF fragments.
In addition, comprehensive experiments are conducted to
validate the proposed algorithm, which covers four standard
benchmark suites, one specific suite characterized by deceptive
constraints, and ten real-world application scenarios spanning
four distinct domains, covering both standard and large-scale
decision variables. By comparing DSOCOL with nine state-of-
the-art CMOEAs, the experimental results confirm its superior
performance and robustness across a wide range of CMOPs
with diverse and complex landscapes.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II reviews the related work. Sections III and IV provide the
details of DSOCOL and the experimental results and analysis.
Section V summarizes conclusions and future work.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Preliminaries
A CMOP can be mathematically denoted as follows:
Minimize F(x) = (f1(x), f2(x), · · ·, fM (x))T ,
s.t. x ∈ SD,
gi(x) = 0, i= 1, · · ·, p
hj(x) ≤ 0, j= 1, · · ·, q
(1)
where F(x) are objective functions; M is the number of
objectives; x = ( x1, x2, · · ·, xD) represents one solution in
the decision space SD; D is the decision variable dimension;
gi(x) and hj(x) denote the degree of constraint violation (CV)
of the solution on the ith and jth constraint functions. The
overall CV of x is
CV (x) =
pX
i=1
|gi(x)| +
qX
j=1
max(0, hj(x)) (2)
CV (x) = 0 means x is a feasible solution, otherwise x is
infeasible solution.
For any two solutions, x is said to Pareto dominate y
(notated as x ≺ y) if x is no worse than y regarding all
objective components and outperforms y in at least one. z is
an unconstrained Pareto optimal solution if z is not dominated
by any other candidate x within the entire search space. The
aggregate of these solutions is termed the unconstrained Pareto
optimal set (UPS). Similarly, a feasible solution z (where
CV (z) = 0 ) is defined as a constrained Pareto optimal
solution if no other feasible solution x can dominate it. These
points together constitute the constrained Pareto optimal set
(CPS). The projections of the UPS and CPS onto the objective
space are designated as the unconstrained Pareto front (UPF)
and the CPF, respectively.
B. Existing CMOEAs
Over the past few decades, many CMOEAs have been
proposed to solve the challenge of balancing convergence,
feasibility, and diversity. Based on their underlying CHTs,
these existing approaches can be broadly categorized into the
following groups.
1) Methods based on the separation of objectives and con-
straints. When addressing CMOPs, these approaches treat the
evaluation of objective functions and constraint satisfaction as
distinct processes. The CDP stands out as a classic example of
this category, applying the rules of standard Pareto dominance
to constrained environments [8]. Despite the simplicity of
CDP, methods driven purely by feasibility often suffer from
premature convergence. To better leverage information from
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 3 ---
3
infeasible individuals, Fan et al. [10] integrated an improved
ε method into the MOEA/D. This method dynamically tunes
the relaxation parameter ε according to the current ratio of
feasible solutions. Similarly, to prevent the population from
becoming stagnant, Zhu et al. [9] introduced a mechanism that
utilizes an enhanced ε-constrained strategy to identify the CPF.
Specifically, with a constrained relaxation value ε, a solution
x is considered to ε-constraint dominate solution y ( x ≺ε y)
when any of the criteria listed below are met.
• CV (x) ≤ ε & CV (y) ≤ ε & x ≺ y.
• CV (x) ≤ ε < CV(y) .
• ε < CV(x) < CV(y).
Furthermore, Stochastic Ranking (SR) offers another per-
spective by introducing a probability parameter, pf. This
parameter determines whether the comparison between two
individuals should focus on their objective values or their
degree of constraint violation. To improve this, Ying et al.
[16] developed an adaptive SR mechanism that automatically
adjusts pf based on the evolutionary status and the variation
in violation levels among individuals. Additionally, Jan and
Khanum et al. [17] incorporated a modified version of SR
into MOEA/D for solving CMOPs. Gu et al. [18] developed
a surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithm, where they intro-
duced an enhanced SR strategy by integrating a fitness-based
mechanism with an adaptive probability operator. Liu et al.
[19] investigated indicator-based CMOEAs by incorporating
the indicator-based MOEA with SR, the ε-constraint method,
and CDP, respectively. Nevertheless, a major drawback of both
SR and ε-based methods is their reliance on extra parameters,
which can be difficult to tune and may negatively affect the
algorithm’s overall performance.
2) Methods based on penalty function. The fundamental
principle of this category involves incorporating constraint
violations directly into the objective functions in the form
of penalty terms. While this strategy is attractive due to its
straightforward implementation, the algorithm’s effectiveness
relies heavily on the precise tuning of penalty coefficients. To
optimize the search process, Ma et al. [20] developed a shift-
based penalty scheme. This approach directs the population
toward feasible regions during the initial phases of evolution,
while focusing on converging to the CPF in the latter stages.
Jiao et al. [21] introduced a feasibility-guided strategy that
revises the objective functions according to the level of con-
straint violation, thereby producing updated fitness values. In
terms of parameter automation, Yu et al. [22] introduced a
mechanism assisted by dynamic selection preference to adjust
the priority between objective minimization and constraint
satisfaction. More precisely, the emphasis placed on objectives
is progressively decreased from 1 down to 0, following a spe-
cific cosine curve trajectory. In addition, to better coordinate
objective optimization and constraint satisfaction, the penalty
coefficient is dynamically tuned based on the proportion of
feasible solutions in the current population. Vaz et al. [23]
proposed a three-stage penalty scheme, where distinct penalty
coefficients are applied during different phases of the evolu-
tionary process.
3) Methods of transforming CMOPs into other problem. Popu-
lar strategies for addressing CMOPs often involve restructuring
the problem into either a multi-phase process or a collaborative
framework involving multiple populations. In the context of
multi-stage CMOEAs, the evolutionary process is segmented
into distinct periods, each employing a unique CHT. For
instance, Fan et al. [15] introduced a push-pull framework.
This method operates by initially driving the population toward
the UPF during the push phase, and subsequently retrieving in-
dividuals back towards the feasible regions and the CPF in the
pull phase. Similarly, CMOEA-MS developed by Tian et al.
[24] functions in two stages: one dedicated to locating the
feasible region, and the other designed to distribute the solu-
tions along the feasible boundary. Xiang et al. [25] presented
a two-stage algorithm called CIC-MOEA/D. In the first stage,
the algorithm focuses solely on the objective functions to
identify the UPF. In the second stage, constraint information
is progressively strengthened so that the search can better
converge toward the CPF.
On the other hand, multi-population CMOEAs evolve sev-
eral independent groups of individuals simultaneously, as-
signing different CHTs to each group. A notable example
is the work of Sun et al. [12], who devised a novel con-
straint relaxation technique aimed at retaining high-potential
solutions within the population. Concurrently, they utilized
an external archive based on CDP to store the set of feasi-
ble non-dominated solutions. Additionally, Wang et al. [14]
presented a cooperative framework based on DE that utilizes
m distinct subpopulations. In this structure, each subpopu-
lation is tasked with optimizing a specific objective subject
to constraints. Alongside this, an archive population is em-
ployed to preserve the identified constrained non-dominated
solutions, thereby facilitating convergence to the CPF. A dual-
population framework was introduced by Liu et al. [26] to
reformulate CMOPs. Within this architecture, one specific
group is dedicated entirely to handling constraints, whereas
the second group concentrates solely on improving the ob-
jective optimization. Throughout the evolutionary process,
information exchange and knowledge sharing occur between
these two distinct populations. Conversely, Yang et al. [27]
tackled CMOPs by dividing the main problem into several
smaller sub-tasks through the segmentation of the objective
space. To effectively address these generated sub-problems, a
combination of different CHTs was simultaneously employed.
4) Methods of altering the reproduction operators. The core
of this category of algorithms lies in the construction of
specialized and efficient reproductive operators. To enhance
the capability of competitive swarm optimizer (CSO) in
solving CMOPs, Ming et al. [28] developed a competitive
and cooperative swarm optimizer. This technique refines the
competitive process via an extension parameter to expedite
convergence towards the Pareto front. Concurrently, it employs
a cooperative mutual-learning scheme to assist the swarm in
bypassing local feasible traps. In terms of mutation strategies,
Yu et al. [29] introduced a novel mechanism capable of
processing both feasible and infeasible individuals, thereby
ensuring a uniform distribution along the CPF. More recently,
Ming et al. [30] integrated deep reinforcement learning into
an operator selection framework. By treating the population’s
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 4 ---
4
status as environmental states, this approach adaptively iden-
tifies the most suitable evolutionary operator for the current
stage. Miyakawa et al. [31] developed a strategy for direct
matching, through which each individual is provided with a
specific search direction determined by its distribution in the
objective space. In contrast, He et al. [32] focused on the
reproduction stage and pointed out that generating offspring
with either feasibility potential or useful infeasibility is critical
to the search process.
5) Methods of evolutionary multi-tasking optimization. As
a specialized branch of evolutionary transfer optimization
(ETO) [33], evolutionary multi-tasking optimization (EMT)
focuses on enhancing performance through the collaborative
exchange of beneficial information between distinct tasks.
This mechanism shares conceptual similarities with the multi-
population strategy in CMOEAs. Drawing inspiration from
this information interaction, Qiao et al. [13] developed a
method that treats populations (specifically parent or off-
spring sets) as transferable knowledge. They introduced an
unconstrained auxiliary task designed to locate the UPF. The
transfer strategy is condition-dependent: parent populations are
transferred when the CPF is a subset of the UPF, whereas
offspring populations are exchanged when there is a partial
overlap between the CPF and UPF. In a different approach,
Ming et al. [11] constructed a tri-task framework that inte-
grates the strengths of both constraint-ignoring and constraint-
relaxing tasks. Qiao et al. [34] proposed MTCMO, which
handles CMOPs by introducing a dynamic auxiliary task
whose constraint boundary is progressively tightened to better
match the main task. With this design, the population can
bypass infeasible barriers at the early stage and then move
toward the CPF from infeasible regions as the search proceeds.
Nevertheless, the simultaneous optimization of multiple tasks
inevitably increases algorithmic complexity, which may hinder
convergence when computational resources are restricted.
Remarks: To retain the synergistic benefits of multi-
population interaction while bypassing the burden of task
reformulation, the proposed DSOCOL adopts an approach
distinct from EMT. Specifically, from a structural perspec-
tive, both DSOCOL and the EMT framework belong to the
multi-population paradigm, leveraging information interaction
between different populations. However, they diverge funda-
mentally in two aspects. First, in terms of problem formulation,
EMT methods typically model the CMOP as multiple explicit
tasks and solve them concurrently. In contrast, DSOCOL
maintains the original problem structure without reformulating
it into auxiliary tasks; instead, it decouples the search process
into global exploration and diversity exploitation through
a collaborative orthogonal learning mechanism. Second, re-
garding the knowledge transfer strategy, while EMT focuses
on transferring high-quality spatial coordinates (positional
knowledge) by selecting elite solutions from different tasks,
DSOCOL emphasizes extracting and transferring favorable
evolutionary trends to provide more efficient directional guid-
ance for the search.
III. T HE PROPOSED METHOD
A. Procedure of DSOCOL
Algorithm 1 provides the detailed explanation of DSOCOL.
The maximum generation T and swarm size N are input. The
algorithm starts by evolving two different swarms S1 and S2
(line 1). Afterwards, the evolutionary generation counter t and
the number of niches K are initialized (line 2). The COL
strategy is configured to execute every 75 generations, and
the initial value for constraint relaxation εmax is set to the
maximum constraint violation degree in the initial population
(line 3). K uniformly weighted vectors V are initialized (line
4). We adopt the fitness evaluation functions of SPEA2 [35]
in this research, which can be represented as Eq. (3). It is
worth noting that when ε = 0, this strategy is equivalent to
CDP. In line 5, S1 is evaluated under constrained relaxation
ε(t) to traverse infeasible regions and enhance global explo-
ration. In contrast, ε for S2 is set to 0, thereby allowing the
population to enter the feasible region and enhance diversity
exploitation along the CPF (line 6). The main loop runs until
the computational resources are exhausted (lines 7-20).



γε
(x,y) =
(
1, if y ≺ε x
0, otherwise
Rε
x =
X
i∈S,i̸=x
γε
(x,y)
f itness(x) =
X
i∈S,i̸=x
|Rε
x| + 1
dist(x, x′) + 2
(3)
where dist(x, x′) is the Euclidean distance from x to its
closest neighbor in the objective space.
Algorithm 1: The framework of DSOCOL
Input: T (maximum generation), N (swarm size)
Output: S1 (particle swarm)
1 Generate initial swarms S1 and S2;
2 Set the current generation t = 1, the number of niches K = N
10 ;
3 Set the frequency of COL TCOL = 75, the initial constraint relaxation value
ε(t) = εmax = maxx∈S1 CV (x);
4 Initialize the weight vectors V = [V 1, . . . , VK];
5 F1 ← Evaluate S1 according to Eq. (3) where ε = ε(t);
6 F2 ← Evaluate S2 according to Eq. (3) where ε = 0;
7 while t ≤ T do
8 O1 ← Offspring Generation ( S1, 1, F1) (Algorithm 2);
9 O2 ← Offspring Generation ( S2, 2, F2) (Algorithm 2);
10 (S1, F1) ← Environmental Selection ( S1 ∪ O1 ∪ O2, N, ε(t))
(Algorithm 4);
11 (S2, F2) ← Niche-Guided Subset Selection ( S2 ∪ O1 ∪ O2, N, V)
(Algorithm 5);
12 if mod(t, TCOL ) == 0 then
13 (O1, O2) ← Collaborative Orthogonal Learning ( S1, S2, V , N,
ε(t)) (Algorithm 3);
14 (S1, F1) ← Environmental Selection ( S1 ∪ O1 ∪ O2, N, ε(t))
(Algorithm 4);
15 (S2, F2) ← Niche-Guided Subset Selection
(S2 ∪ O1 ∪ O2, N, V) (Algorithm 5);
16 end
17 t = t + 1;
18 ε(t) ← Update the constraint relaxation value according to Eq. (7);
19 end
20 Return S1;
Loser Updates : In lines 8-9, new offspring are generated
swarm S1 and S2 based on different conditions using Algo-
rithm 2. Specifically, in lines 1 to 11 of Algorithm 2, the
parental swarm is randomly divided into two groups. Through
pairwise comparison of fitness values, a winner group Sw and
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 5 ---
5
a loser group Sl are formed. Next, regardless of whether the
loser group belongs to S1 or S2, new offspring are generated
using Eq. (4), which originates from [36] and represents the
most fundamental CSO loser group update method.



∆(t) = xw(t) − xl(t)
vl(t + 1) = r0vl(t) + r1∆(t)
xl(t + 1) = xl(t) + vl(t + 1)
(4)
where xw, xl, and vl refer to the positions of winner particle
and loser particle, and the velocity of the loser particle, with
t indicating the current generation. r0 and r1 are uniformly
distributed random values between 0 and 1.
Winner Updates : Since S1 and S2 are assigned different
task goals, we develop two approaches to further improve their
winner groups, as observed in lines 13-17 of Algorithm 2. In
detail, S1 and S2 update their winner group using Eq. (5) and
Eq. (6), respectively. This approach differs from conventional
CSO methods in that standard CSO only applies polynomial
mutation to the winning group, whereas our method further
enhances the winning group. While consuming the same num-
ber of evaluations, this improvement significantly boosts CSO
performance, which will be demonstrated in the subsequent
ablation study section.



C(t) = 1
2 (xf
w(t) + xl
w(t))
∆(t) = xf
w(t) − xl
w(t)
xf
w(t + 1) = C(t) + β
2 ∆(t)
xl
w(t + 1) = C(t) − β
2 ∆(t)
(5)
where xf
w(t) and xl
w(t) are the first and last halves of the
winner group at generation t respectively; β is the spread fac-
tor, controlled by a distribution index to regulate the distance
between the generated offspring and the center point.
xk
w(t + 1) = xk
w(t) + xb
w(t) − xk
w(t)
2 + xi
w(t) − xj
w(t)
2 (6)
where xk
w(t) and xb
w(t) represent the k-th particle and the best
solution in the winner group respectively; xi
w(t) and xj
w(t) are
two distinct random particles.
Environmental Selection: After the generation of the new
offspring O1 and O2, Algorithms 4 and 5 are executed sepa-
rately to select the new generation of the two swarms (lines
10-11). In lines 12-16, the proposed COL strategy is executed
every 75 generations. New solutions generated through trend
learning and orthogonal learning (line 13) are then selected
by the different methods (lines 14-15). Finally, the generation
counter t and the constraint relaxation ε(t) are updated. In this
paper, we use Eq. (7) to update ε(t), with parameters in this
formula identical to the original reference [9].
ε(t + 1) =
(
(1 − σ)ε(t), if fr ≤ α
εmax, otherwise (7)
where t denotes the index for the current generation; σ is con-
fined within the range [σmin, 1], σmin = 1 − (1/ε(0))(Tmax/3);
Algorithm 2: Offspring Generation
Input: S (parent swarm), T (swarm type), F (fitness value of the S)
Output: O (offspring swarm)
1 while |S| > 1 do
2 {p, q}← Randomly select two particles from S;
3 S ← S\{p, q};
4 if F (p) < F (q) then
5 Sw ← q;
6 Sl ← p;
7 else
8 Sw ← p;
9 Sl ← q;
10 end
11 end
12 S ′
l ← Update Sl according to Eq. (4);
13 if T == 1 then
14 S ′
w ← Update Sw according to Eq. (5);
15 else
16 S ′
w ← Update Sw according to Eq. (6);
17 end
18 O ← {S′
w, S ′
l };
19 Return O;
εmax is determined by the highest constraint violation value
in the initial population; α is set to 0.95; fr represents the
feasible ratio.
B. Collaborative Orthogonal Learning
Unlike traditional collaboration frameworks that rely on
sharing solution information, COL facilitates a convergence
direction synergy between the two swarms, which is achieved
through two distinct yet complementary mechanisms. Algo-
rithm 3 provides the details. The COL process is executed
within each niche (lines 2-24). Specifically, for S1, the process
begins by identifying candidate solutions associated with the
i-th niche (lines 3-4). Subsequently, these candidates are
categorized into a feasible non-dominated set and a remaining
set (line 5). If both sets are non-empty, a representative
solution is randomly selected from each set (line 7). Otherwise,
the candidates are sorted based on constraint violation and
divided into two sets at the median value, from which one
representative solution is selected respectively (lines 8-11).
Upon determining the representative solutions, the trend learn-
ing strategy is executed by Eq. (8) to extract the promising
convergence direction, which is then utilized to generate the
new experimental solutions (line 12).



∆1 = xw − xl,
∆2 = xw − xr,
v = τ ∆1 + (1 − τ )∆2
∥τ ∆1 + (1 − τ )∆2∥ ,
umain = xr + ηk · v,
(8)
where xw and xl represent the winner and loser solutions
within a specific niche of S1 respectively; xr is set to the upper
bound and lower bound of the decision space respectively;
τ = F E
F Emax
, where F Eand F Emax are the current and
maximum number of function evaluations respectively; ηk is
the kth random search step size.
Local exploitation vector ( ∆1): Defined as xw − xl, which
captures the relative difference between the superior and infe-
rior individuals. It reflects local competitive trends, guiding the
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 6 ---
6
search to focus on the neighborhood of high-quality solutions
to enhance the local mining capability of the CPF.
Global exploration vector ( ∆2): Defined as xw − xr, this
component captures a global evolutionary tendency of the
population. Specifically, since the population is initialized
within the bounded decision space, and the losers iteratively
evolve by learning from winners, the winners act as a carrier
of the most successful search experiences at the current stage.
Consequently, the positional shift of xw across iterations
reflects a favorable evolutionary trend. By constructing a
direction from the decision space boundary to the winner,
∆2 converts the population’s local successful experiences into
a global exploration direction. This global exploration vector
orients the search towards a broad search of the entire decision
space, preventing stagnation in local regions and enhancing the
population’s capability to rapidly converge towards the CPF
across the global landscape.
Algorithm 3: Collaborative Orthogonal Learning
Input: S1 (particle swarm), S2 (particle swarm), V (weight vectors), N
(swarm size), ε (constraint relaxation)
Output: O1 (offspring swarm), O2(offspring swarm)
1 O1 = O2 = ∅;
2 for i = 1 to K do
3 θ1 ← Calculate the angle between V i and each solution in S1;
4 Φ1 ← Select ⌊ N
K ⌋ solutions from S1 having the minimum angular
distance to V i according to θ1;
5 (Φnf
1 , Φrem
1 ) ← Divide Φ1 into two groups according to ϵ;
// the non-dominated feasible solution set Φnf
1
and the rest of the solutions Φrem
1
6 if Φnf
1 ̸= ∅ and Φrem
1 ̸= ∅ then
7 (xw, xl) ← Randomly select a solution from Φnf
1 and Φrem
1
respectively;
8 else
9 (Φf h
1 , Φsh
1 ) ← Sort Φ1 in ascending order based on constraint
violation degree;
// Φf h
1 and Φsh
1 represent the sorted solutions
from the first half and the second half
10 (xw, xl) ← Randomly select a solution from Φf h
1 and Φsh
1
respectively;
11 end
12 (umain, v) ← Performing the trend learning strategy based on xw
and xl according to Eq. (8);
13 O1 = O1 ∪ umain;
14 θ2 ← Calculate the angle between V i and each solution in S2;
15 Φ2 ← Select ⌊ N
K ⌋ solutions from S2 having the minimum angular
distance to V i according to θ2;
16 Φnf
2 ← Select non-dominated feasible solutions from Φ2 based on
CDP;
17 if Φnf
2 ̸= ∅ then
18 xb ← Randomly select a solution from Φnf
2 ;
19 else
20 xb ← Select a solution with the minimum constraint violation
from Φ2 ;
21 end
22 uaux ← Performing the orthogonal learning strategy based on xb and
v according to Eq. (9);
23 O2 = O2 ∪ uaux;
24 end
25 Return O1, O2;
To dynamically balance these two behaviors, a time-varying
weight coefficient τ is introduced. Specifically, in the early
stage (small τ), the weight (1 − τ ) dominates, prompting
the algorithm to prioritize ∆2 for global exploration. In the
later stage (large τ), the weight τ increases, shifting the focus
towards ∆1 for precise local exploitation.
Conversely, since S1 has already identified a promising con-
vergence direction, S2 is tasked with leveraging this directional
information to explore the complementary subspace. This
strategy effectively avoids redundant searches and maximizes
the likelihood of uniformly covering the CPF. Given that
the learning direction for S2 is predetermined by S1, the
primary goal is to identify a representative solution to serve
as a positional anchor. Specifically, candidate solutions in S2
associated with the i-th niche are first identified (lines 14-
15). Subsequently, the non-dominated feasible solutions within
this set are extracted (line 16). If this set is non-empty, a
representative is randomly selected from it; otherwise, the
solution with the minimum constraint violation is chosen as
the representative (lines 17-21). Finally, utilizing the promising
direction determined by S1 and the selected representative
solution, the orthogonal learning strategy is executed according
to Eq. (9) (line 22).
uaux = xb + ηj · v⊥ (9)
where xb is the best winner solution within a specific niche
of S2; v⊥ is the orthogonal direction derived from the con-
vergence direction v (Eq. (8)).
First decision  variable
Second decision  variable
CPS
(a) Trend Learning
First decision  variable
Second decision  variable
CPS (b) Orthogonal Learning
Fig. 1. An illustration example of the proposed collaborative orthogonal
learning. (a) Trend Learning in S1: The convergence direction (blue solid line)
is synthesized from local and global vectors to guide offspring (green stars) to
converge toward the CPS. (b) Orthogonal Learning in S2: The complementary
direction (purple solid line) is generated by orthogonalizing the transferred
trend (blue dashed line) to expand diversity along the CPS.
For a clearer understanding of the proposed collaborative
orthogonal learning strategy, Fig. 1 illustrates the process of
executing the COL strategy within a niche. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), the trend learning process of the main swarm ( S1)
is depicted. Specifically, xw and xl represent the selected
representative solutions. They form the basis for constructing
potential convergence vectors: the local exploitation vector
(∆1) and the global exploration vector ( ∆2 and ∆′
2). These
vectors are dynamically synthesized to form a unified conver-
gence direction (the blue solid line). Subsequently, experimen-
tal solutions (represented by green stars) are generated along
the directions. The primary task of S1 is to identify and learn
promising directions that enable rapid convergence towards the
CPS, ensuring global exploration.
In contrast, Fig. 1(b) illustrates the orthogonal learning
process of the auxiliary swarm ( S2). Through the knowl-
edge transfer, the convergence directions identified by S1
are inherited by S2 (shown as the blue dashed lines). The
selected representative solution xb then serves as a pivot to
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 7 ---
7
orthogonalize these inherited directions, yielding the com-
plementary search directions (indicated by the purple solid
lines). Similarly, S2 learns these complementary search direc-
tions, which demonstrates that S2 focuses on exploring the
complementary subspace to the main trend, thereby avoiding
redundant searches and enhancing diversity along the CPS. It
is worth noting that xb is selected as the solution closest to
the CPF within its niche. This implies that xb is likely situated
in close proximity to the CPS in the decision space. Selecting
these solutions as positional anchors aims to maximize the
probability that the determined orthogonal directions cover the
CPS, thereby effectively expanding the distribution range of
the solutions.
C. Niche-Guided Subset Selection
To better decouple the tasks of approximating the feasible
region and distributing along the CPF, S1 and S2 are assigned
different strategies for environmental selection. Specifically,
S1 utilizes the "Environmental Selection()" procedure, as
outlined in Algorithm 4, to select the next generation. The
fitness evaluation is determined by ε (lines 2). Then, the
next generation is selected based on the evaluated fitness
values, and their fitness values are output (line 3-11). This
simple environmental selection strategy is widely used in
CMOEAs [37] to increase the selection pressure on S1 and
thus accelerate convergence.
Algorithm 4: Environmental Selection
Input: O (candidate offspring), N (required size), ε (constraint relaxation)
Output: O′ (offspring after selection), F ′ (fitness values of O′)
1 O′ ← ∅;
2 F ←Evaluate O according to Eq. (3) based on ε ;
3 O′ ← {Oi|Fi < 1, i= 1, 2, · · ·, |F |};
4 if
O′ < Nthen
5 Sort O based on F;
6 O′ ← Select N particles with smaller value of F;
7 else
8 O′ ← perform the truncation strategy of SPEA2;
9 end
10 F ′ ← F(O′);
11 Return O′, F ′;
To enhance S2’s capability for extensive exploitation of the
objective space, we propose a niche-guided subset selection
(NGSS) strategy, as detailed in Algorithm 5. The core mech-
anism consists of the following three steps:
• First-Level Subset Division (lines 1-3) : First, a set of
uniform weight vectors V = {V 1, ..., VK} is employed
to divide the objective space into K distinct search
spaces. The candidate pool O is first stratified into two
subsets based on the CDP: Φnf and Φrem.
• Second-Level Subset Division (lines 3-9) : Then, each
solution in Φnf is then associated with a specific niche
to which it has the minimum angular distance, forming
K niches (Φnf
1 , . . . ,Φnf
K ). To prevent the population
from aggregating in easily accessible feasible regions,
we enforce a local capacity constraint L = ⌊N/K⌋
for each niche. Specifically, if the niche Φnf
i exceeding
capacity, only the L solutions with the best crowding
degree are retained. Simultaneously, redundant solutions
are removed from Φnf
i to the residual set Φrem.
Algorithm 5: Niche-Guided Subset Selection
Input: O (candidate offspring), N (required size), V (weight vectors)
Output: O′ (offspring after selection), F ′ (fitness values of O′)
1 θ ← Calculate the angle between each vector [V 1, . . . , VK] in V and each
solution in O;
2 (Φnf , Φrem) ← Divide O into two groups according to CDP;
// the non-dominated feasible solution set Φnf and
the rest of the solutions Φrem
3 (Φnf
1 , . . . ,Φnf
K ) ← Divide Φnf into K niches according to θ;
4 for i = 1 to K do
5 if |Φnf
i | > ⌊ N
K ⌋ then
6 Φnf
i ← Select ⌊ N
K ⌋ solutions with better crowding from Φnf
i ;
7 Φrem ← Add the unselected solutions from Φnf
i to Φrem;
8 end
9 end
10 (Φrem
1 , . . . ,Φrem
K ) ← Divide Φrem into K niches according to θ;
11 for j = 1 to K do
12 if |Φnf
j | < ⌊ N
K ⌋ then
13 if |Φrem
j | > ⌊ N
K ⌋ − |Φnf
j | then
14 Φnf
j ← Select (⌊ N
K ⌋ − |Φnf
j |) solutions from Φrem
j to
Φnf
j based on the CDP;
15 else
16 Φnf
j = Φnf
j ∪ Φrem
j ;
17 Φnf
j ← Select (⌊ N
K ⌋ − |Φnf
j | − |Φrem
j |) solutions from
Φrem that have a smaller angular distance to the j-th niche
to Φnf
j ;
18 end
19 end
20 end
21 O′ = Φnf
1 ∪ Φnf
2 · · · ∪Φnf
K ;
22 F ←Evaluate O′ according to Eq. (3) where ε = 0 ;
23 Return O′, F ′;
• Third-Level Subset Division (lines 10-20) : After adjust-
ing the capacity of each niche, the crowded niches are
adjusted, but sparse niches may exist. This step primarily
involves dividing the residual set into several subsets to
supplement the sparse niches in Φnf
1 , . . . ,Φnf
K . Specifi-
cally, the updated residual set ( Φrem) is divided into K
niches (Φrem
1 , . . . ,Φrem
K ). Iterate through each niche. If
jth niche ( Φnf
j ) remains sparse ( |Φnf
j | < ⌊N/K⌋), it is
filled by the jth residual subset Φrem
j . If the number of
solutions in Φrem
j exceeds the required number ( ⌊ N
K ⌋ −
|Φnf
j |), then select ( ⌊ N
K ⌋ − |Φnf
j |) solutions based on the
CDP to fill into Φnf
j . Otherwise, all solutions of Φrem
j
are added to Φnf
j . Then, (⌊ N
K ⌋−| Φnf
j |−| Φrem
j |) solutions
are selected from Φrem based on angular distance to be
added to Φnf
j .
To visualize the proposed NGSS strategy, Fig. 2 presents
an illustrative example assuming a population size N = 6 and
K = 3 niches. There are 2N = 12 candidate solutions ( x1-
x12) and K weight vectors ( V 1, V2, V3). The capacity limit
for each niche is L = ⌊N/K⌋ = 2.
Fig. 2(a) illustrates the first-level subset division. All so-
lutions are divided into two subsets based on the CDP: the
non-dominated feasible set Φnf (x1, x2, x3) and the remain-
der set Φrem (x4-x12). This step prioritizes feasibility and
convergence.
Fig. 2(b) shows the second-level subset division. Solutions
in Φnf are assigned to niches based on angular distance,
Φnf
1 = Φ nf
3 = ∅, Φnf
2 = {x1, x2, x3}. Since the number of
solutions in Φnf
2 exceeds L (3 > 2), the most crowded solution
x2 is removed and added to Φrem. Consequently, Φnf
2 retains
{x1, x3}. This level effectively controls population density in
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 8 ---
8
First objective variable
Second objective variable
Feasible regions
(a) First-Level Subset Division
First objective variable
Second objective variable
Feasible regions (b) Second-Level Subset Divi-
sion
First objective variable
Second objective variable
Feasible regions
(c) Third-Level Subset Division
Fig. 2. An illustration example of the proposed niche-guided subset selection.
favored objective regions.
Fig. 2(c) depicts the third-level subset division. The so-
lutions in Φrem are also categorized into niches: Φrem
1 =
{x4, x5, x10}, Φrem
2 = {x2, x6, . . . , x12}, and Φrem
3 = {x9}.
Then the sparse niches are filled (where size < L). Specif-
ically, for the empty Φnf
1 , solutions x4 and x5 are selected
from Φrem
1 based on CDP. For the empty Φnf
3 , x9 from
Φrem
3 is added first. Since it still requires one more solution,
x8 is selected from the remaining candidates due to its
smaller angular distance to V 3. Finally, the updated niches are
Φnf
1 = {x4, x5}, Φnf
2 = {x1, x3}, and Φnf
3 = {x8, x9}. The
third level ensures that the swarm does not exhibit preferential
search for specific niches. In summary, the proposed NGSS
strategy aims to uniformly search the objective space while
ensuring a degree of convergence pressure, thereby enhancing
the ability to capture discrete CPFs.
D. Computational Complexity
For DSOCOL, the time complexity of parameter and swarm
initialization is O(M N) and O(DN ), respectively. The com-
plexity of the swarm update including the COL strategy is
dominated by O(M N2). The time complexity of environ-
mental selection for the main swarm is O(N 3), primarily
attributed to the truncation strategy of SPEA2. The time
complexity of the NGSS strategy for the auxiliary swarm
is O(M N2 + DN ). As a result, the overall computational
complexity of DSOCOL in the worst case is O(N 3). Due to
space limitations, a detailed computational complexity analysis
is provided in Supp-Section III of the Supplementary Files.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL STUDIES
A. Experimental Settings
1) Benchmark Instances: To measure the overall perfor-
mance of the proposed DSOCOL in addressing problems with
varying landscape, we conducted comprehensive experiments
on 33 CMOP instances belonging to DAS-CMOPs [38], C-
DTLZ [39], DC-DTLZ [40] and LIR-CMOPs [41]. Beyond the
standard settings with decision variables D <100, we further
extended these four benchmarks to large-scale configurations
(D = 500 and D = 1000) to verify the algorithm’s efficacy
in high-dimensional search spaces. Furthermore, a specific test
suite named FCPs [42] was introduced to assess the robustness
of DSOCOL against deceptive constraints. All experiments
were performed on PlatEMO [43].
2) CMOEAs for Comparison: To comprehensively eval-
uate the performance of the proposed DSOCOL, we com-
pared it against nine state-of-the-art CMOEAs: APSEA [44],
C3M [45], CMOEMT [11], DRLOS-EMCMO [30], IM-C-
MOEA/D [46], CMOCSO [28], DVCEA [47], LCMEA [48],
and POCEA [32]. The selection of these comparison algo-
rithms was driven by the need to assess algorithmic robust-
ness across diverse constraint landscapes and varying prob-
lem scales. Specifically, APSEA, C3M, CMOEMT, DRLOS-
EMCMO, and IM-C-MOEA/D serve as representative solvers
designed for standard-scale CMOPs; CMOCSO and DVCEA
are included for their versatility in handling both standard and
large-scale CMOPs; while LCMEA and POCEA are selected
for their design for large-scale CMOPs.
3) Parameter Settings: In the experimental setup, the pop-
ulation size N is set to 100. All comparison algorithms are
run independently on each problem 30 times. The termination
criterion is determined by the maximum number of function
evaluations ( F Emax), which is set to 100, 000 for standard-
scale benchmarks, and extended to 200, 000 and 300, 000
for large-scale benchmarks with D = 500 and D = 1000 ,
respectively. All the parameters of GA and DE operator are
the same as the previous references [8], [49] or original
studies of the compared CMOEAs. Furthermore, to ensure the
consistency of experimental conditions and the comparability
of results, the parameters for all comparison algorithms are
strictly configured in accordance with their original publica-
tions.
4) Performance Indicators: To clarify the performance of
the methods, we use two popular performance metrics: In-
verted Generation Distance (IGD) [50] and Hypervolume (HV)
[51]. The Subsection II of the Supplementary Files provides
specific information and formulas for these two indicators. In
addition, the performance indicator results were statistically
analyzed using KEEL software [52] at a significance level
of 0.05. Based on the Wilcoxon analysis, the notations ′′+′′,
′′−′′, and ′′ ≈′′ signify that the performance of the comparative
algorithm is significantly superior to, inferior to, or statistically
indistinguishable from DSOCOL. Furthermore, “NaN” implies
that the algorithm failed to find any feasible solution.
B. Comparison Studies
1) Comparison on Standard CMOPs: To comprehen-
sively assess the performance of DSOCOL on standard-
scale CMOPs, the proposed DSOCOL is compared with nine
state-of-the-art CMOEAs and the statistical results on four
benchmark suites with the standard dimensions are presented
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 9 ---
9
in Tables S-V and S-VI of the Supplementary Files , re-
spectively. For a more intuitive view, we summarize all the
results in Table I. In terms of IGD, DSOCOL demonstrated
significant performance advantages over the comparison meth-
ods on 19 of the 33 problems. DVCEA achieved the best
results in six instances. Concerning HV , DSOCOL outper-
formed APSEA, C3M, CMOEMT, DRLOS-EMCMO, IM-
C-MOEA/D, CMOCSO, DVCEA, LCMEA and POCEA in
25, 31, 17, 22, 32, 16, 18, 32 and 33 of the 33 instances.
The reasons for the poor performance of these comparison
algorithms can be analyzed as follows.
For APSEA, it employs an adaptive population sizing strat-
egy within a multi-population framework to balance objec-
tive optimization and constraint satisfaction. By dynamically
adjusting the number of function evaluations for different
populations, it achieves high efficiency on problems with
simple feasibility landscapes. However, its reproduction relies
on traditional operators that lack explicit directional guidance.
On problems with extremely narrow feasible regions or large
infeasible regions like LIR-CMOPs, APSEA struggles to guide
the population across infeasible barriers, often leading to
premature convergence in local feasible regions.
C3M adopts a multistage framework that prioritizes con-
straints based on the relationship between single-constraint
Pareto fronts (PFs) and the common PF. This allows the
algorithm to explore the objective space more freely in the
early stages. Nevertheless, its performance is sensitive to the
transition between stages. This mechanism risks partial CPF
exploration under insufficient evaluations, as full constraints
are only considered in later stages. In cases where the CPF is
far from the UPF, the population may get trapped in distant
infeasible regions or local optima, making it difficult to re-
converge to the true CPF within limited evaluations.
CMOEMT transforms a CMOP into a multitasking problem
with three distinct tasks (CDP, constraint neglect, and ε-
relaxation) and facilitates knowledge transfer among them.
While solution transfer accelerates convergence for conven-
tional problems, the transferred knowledge remains limited to
the spatial positions of individuals. For problems with narrow
or disjoint feasible regions, such as LIR-CMOPs, this passive
transfer mechanism may induce negative transfer or fail to
capture potential evolutionary trends, leading to diversity loss
or insufficient CPF coverage.
DRLOS-EMCMO utilizes deep reinforcement learning to
adaptively select the most suitable evolutionary operator based
on the population’s real-time state. This intelligent selection
improves the algorithm’s flexibility across different search
stages. However, the decision is primarily based on historical
performance feedback and lacks a geometric understanding of
the search space. Specifically different problems indeed exhibit
preferences for different operators. However, the preference for
rapid convergence and constraint satisfaction prevents uniform
exploration of the objective space, resulting in missing some
CPF fragments.
IM-C-MOEA/D integrates inverse modeling with the frame-
work based on decomposition, attempting to map the objective
space back to the decision space to guide offspring generation.
This method is highly effective for problems with a clear
Pareto optimal set and Pareto front mapping. However, when
confronting complex constraints that result in irregular feasible
boundaries, the accuracy of the inverse model deteriorates
significantly. The inaccurate model guidance may lead the
population far away from the feasible region, leading to dual
failures in convergence and diversity.
CMOCSO leverages competitive learning to accelerate the
search process. Its robust convergence capability makes it
competitive for problems requiring fast approximations or
multimodal characteristics, such as DTLZs. Nevertheless, its
search behavior is often characterized by a single-path conver-
gence toward the feasible regions. In landscapes with multiple
local optima or complex infeasible regions, CMOCSO lacks a
mechanism to explore complementary subspaces, limiting its
ability to maintain a wide distribution along the CPF.
DVCEA classifies decision variables into constraint-related
and constraint-irrelevant categories and applies targeted varia-
tion strategies. However, for DAS-CMOPs with convergence-
hardness, diversity-hardness, and feasibility-hardness, the de-
coupling of constraints may come at the expense of global
convergence. Due to the intense coupling among variables,
this strategy may break the evolutionary relationships, leading
to a loss of convergence performance while attempting to
satisfy complex constraints. Moreover, it lacks global search
mechanism to perform the uniform search required to locate
the narrow and discrete regions of LIR-CMOPs.
LCMEA employs a sampling approach to generate offspring
in preferred directions. However, the sampling points rely on
local population distribution. For problems like LIR-CMOPs
with fragmented CPFs and narrow feasible regions, local
sampling fails to identify the global direction needed to cross
large infeasible barriers, resulting in incomplete CPF coverage.
TABLE I
A SHORT SUMMARY OF COMPARISON STUDY RESULTS ON FOUR BENCHMARK SUITES WITH STANDARD DIMENSIONS
DSOCOL vs (+/-/=) APSEA C3M CMOEMT DRLOS-EMCMO IM-C-MOEA/D CMOCSO DVCEA LCMEA POCEA
DAS-CMOPs IGD 3/6/0 0/7/2 3/6/0 0/4/5 0/8/1 1/5/3 3/5/1 0/9/0 0/9/0
HV 3/6/0 0/7/2 3/3/3 0/4/5 0/8/1 0/4/5 3/3/3 0/9/0 0/9/0
C-DTLZs IGD 1/1/2 1/3/0 1/3/0 1/1/2 0/4/0 1/0/3 1/2/1 1/2/1 1/2/1
HV 2/1/1 0/4/0 0/1/3 1/2/1 0/4/0 1/0/3 2/1/1 0/3/1 0/4/0
DC-DTLZs IGD 1/3/2 0/6/0 1/3/2 1/3/2 0/6/0 2/1/3 1/4/1 0/6/0 0/6/0
HV 1/4/1 0/6/0 2/2/2 0/3/3 0/6/0 1/1/4 0/3/3 0/6/0 0/6/0
LIR-CMOPs IGD 0/14/0 0/14/0 0/11/3 0/12/2 0/14/0 1/11/2 2/11/1 0/14/0 0/13/1
HV 0/14/0 0/14/0 0/11/3 0/13/1 0/14/0 2/9/3 2/11/1 0/14/0 0/14/0
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 10 ---
10
POCEA uses a pairing strategy to reproduce promising off-
spring by emphasizing useful infeasible solutions. However, its
pairing process is primarily based on static Euclidean distance
and fails to capture dynamic trend information. When facing
the combined three-hardness of DAS-CMOP, simple pairing
is insufficient to generate offspring that can simultaneously
penetrate multiple constraints and maintain distribution.
The aforementioned CMOEAs encounter significant chal-
lenges when confronting diverse and complex constraint land-
scapes. To visually demonstrate the performance advantages
of DSOCOL, we present the final solution sets across all test
instances in Figs. S-1 to S-3 of the Supplementary Files .
As shown, DSOCOL achieved complete coverage of the CPF
with uniform distribution on nearly all problems. The pro-
posed DSOCOL achieved outstanding performance because
DSOCOL simultaneously extracts promising evolutionary di-
rections while deeply decoupling the tasks of convergence and
diversity. Specifically, instead of merely performing traditional
offspring generation, the main swarm S1 identifies valuable
convergence directions that facilitate crossing vast infeasible
regions through trend learning. Simultaneously, the auxiliary
swarm S2 minimizes redundant searches by receiving this
trend information and conducting exploration within com-
plementary orthogonal subspaces, thereby achieving efficient
diversity exploitation. Coupled with the NGSS strategy for
three-level subset division mechanism, DSOCOL ensures a
uniform search across the objective space, significantly en-
hancing its capability to capture discrete and fragmented CPFs.
This synergistic mechanism allows DSOCOL to exhibit higher
robustness and superior performance than these comparison
algorithms when handling CMOPs with different landscapes.
Furthermore, to further verify the superiority of DSOCOL,
we conducted the Friedman test with Holm correction to
perform the statistical analysis, which is presented in Table II.
From the table, DSOCOL got the best rankings on IGD and
HV . Furthermore, allp-values were below a significance level
of 0.05, which indicating that DSOCOL significantly outper-
forms the other nine compared CMOEAs. These results further
validate the effectiveness of DSOCOL in balancing feasibility,
convergence, and diversity when dealing with CMOPs with
different characteristics.
TABLE II
AVERAGE RANKINGS AND p-VALUES OF IGD AND HV BY THE FRIEDMAN
TEST OF DSOCOL AND OTHER COMPARED CMOEA S ON FOUR
STANDARD BENCHMARK SUITES .
Algorithm IGD Ranking p-value HV Ranking p-value
APSEA 6.5455 0.000000 6.4091 0.000000
C3M 5.4545 0.000006 5.3182 0.000080
CMOEMT 4.4848 0.001319 4.0909 0.021616
DRLOS-EMCMO 3.7576 0.025347 4.0303 0.026709
IM-C-MOEA/D 9.5303 0.000000 9.5303 0.000000
CMOCSO 3.5909 0.044171 3.8939 0.042074
DVCEA 4.9545 0.000122 4.9394 0.000592
LCMEA 7.0909 0.000000 6.8030 0.000000
POCEA 7.5000 0.000000 7.6061 0.000000
DSOCOL 2.0909 2.3788
2) Comparison on Large-Scale CMOPs: For validating the
proposed DSOCOL’s performance in handling CMOPs with
large-scale decision variable landscapes, we further compared
DSOCOL with nine CMOEAs on the four benchmarks with
large-scale decision variables ( D = 500 and 1000). The
statistical results for IGD and HV across two dimensions are
reported in Tables S-VII and S-VIII of the Supplementary
Files. The summary results are reported in Table S-II of the
Supplementary Files, indicating that DSOCOL obtained clear
advantages over most compared CMOEAs on both IGD and
HV , demonstrating its strong scalability in handling CMOPs
with large-scale search space landscape. Furthermore, the
Friedman test results in Table S-III of the Supplementary
Files show that DSOCOL achieved the best average rankings
on both IGD and HV , with all p-values below 0.05. Therefore,
the experimental results on large-scale CMOPs statistically
verify the superiority of DSOCOL. Due to space limitations,
the detailed analysis of the experimental results is provided in
Supp-Section IV of the Supplementary Files .
3) Comparison on Special CMOPs: To further evaluate
the robustness of DSOCOL, we conducted experiments on
the FCP benchmark suite with special difficulties. Distinct
from conventional benchmarks, the FCP series initializes the
population in the transition zone between the UPF and the
CPF. A defining characteristic of this suite is the presence of
fraudulent constraints, where the constraint violation degrees
exhibit non-monotonicity. These deceptive landscapes act as
evolutionary traps, requiring algorithms to maintain individu-
als with suboptimal objective values and lower feasibility to
traverse the fraudulent regions. The statistical IGD and HV
results on FCP1-5 are summarized in Tables S-IX and S-X of
the Supplementary Files , with Fig. S-6 visualizing the final
solution distribution on FCP4. It is evident that among all
compared methods, only LCMEA, which utilizes a sampling
approach, managed to yield feasible solutions across all prob-
lems. Nevertheless, DSOCOL got the best results on four out
of five instances. Conversely, all other competing algorithms
failed to identify any feasible regions on FCP1-4. This is
because these methods prioritize constraint satisfaction or
objective optimization and perform knowledge transfer solely
based on positional information of solutions. Consequently,
they failed to fully explore the objective space, leading to
their failure to handle problems with deceptive constraints.
These results further verify that the proposed strategies can
effectively handle CMOPs with diverse landscapes.
C. Ablation Studies
In this section, we set up five variants to further confirm the
effectiveness and necessity of the different components.
• DSOCOL1: The auxiliary swarm S2 employs Algorithm 4
instead of the proposed NGSS strategy;
• DSOCOL2: The winners groups of both swarms are
updated solely through polynomial mutation;
• DSOCOL3: The proposed COL strategy is not imple-
mented;
• DSOCOL4: The trend learning strategy is not imple-
mented (without Eq. (8));
• DSOCOL5: The orthogonal learning strategy is not im-
plemented (without Eq. (9));
To fully validate the overall performance of the proposed
methods, we compared DSOCOL and its five variants under
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 11 ---
11
both standard dimensions and 1000 dimensions across four
benchmarks. Table III provides all the summary results of the
ablation experiments and the detailed results of IGD and HV
is presented in Tables S-XI and S-XII of the Supplementary
Files. The following conclusions can be drawn from these
results: (1) DSOCOL significantly outperformed DSOCOL1,
which demonstrates that the proposed NGSS strategy can
maintain comprehensive exploration for the whole objective
space. (2) Compared to DSOCOL2, DSOCOL performed
superior or competitive performance in 78% of cases, validat-
ing the effectiveness of further improvements to the winner
group. (3) DSOCOL outperformed DSOCOL3, DSOCOL4,
and DSOCOL5 confirming the effectiveness of the proposed
COL strategy.
TABLE III
SUMMARY RESULTS OF DSOCOL AND ITS FIVE VARIANTS ON THE FOUR
BENCHMARK SUITES WITH VARYING DIMENSIONS .
IGD(+/ − / ≈) HV( +/ − / ≈)
DSOCOL1 vs. DSOCOL 5/25/36 8/19/39
DSOCOL2 vs. DSOCOL 17/33/16 12/27/27
DSOCOL3 vs. DSOCOL 8/36/22 1/32/33
DSOCOL4 vs. DSOCOL 5/44/17 1/40/25
DSOCOL5 vs. DSOCOL 4/20/43 1/22/43
To clarify the impact of the proposed NGSS strategy, we
plot the populations, with the median IGD among 30 runs
on LIR-CMOP3, obtained by DSOCOL1 and DSOCOL are
presented in Fig. 3. It was evident that although DSOCOL1
successfully converged to the feasible region, it exhibited
poor performance as it only captured a limited portion of
the CPF. This failure was primarily attributed to the absence
of the NGSS strategy, which caused DSOCOL1 to converge
rapidly in a clustered state that led the population into local
feasible regions. Specifically, for problems like LIR-CMOP3
with discrete CPFs, once DSOCOL1 became trapped in local
optima, it lacked the capability to re-distribute across the
objective space to locate all fragmented CPF segments. In
contrast, DSOCOL, equipped with the NGSS strategy, facil-
itated a uniform search throughout the objective space and
yielded highly competitive results, which provides compelling
evidence of the effectiveness and necessity of NGSS strategies
in maintaining population diversity.
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 f1
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4 f2
DSOCOL1 on LIR-CMOP3
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 f1
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4 f2
DSOCOL on LIR-CMOP3
Fig. 3. Populations obtained by DSOCOL1 and DSOCOL on LIR-CMOP3.
Furthermore, the effectiveness of the proposed improve-
ments to the winner group and the COL strategy was further
validated through Fig. 4. Clearly the convergence speed of
DSOCOL2, which only performed polynomial mutation on
the winner group, was significantly lower than DSOCOL
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Evaluations 105
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400IGD
IGD convergence on DC1-DTLZ3 (D = 1000)
DSOCOL1
DSOCOL2
DSOCOL3
DSOCOL
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Evaluations 105
50
100
150
200
250
300
350IGD
IGD convergence on LIR-CMOP11 (D = 1000)
DSOCOL1
DSOCOL2
DSOCOL3
DSOCOL
Fig. 4. Convergence results of DSOCOL and DSOCOL1-3 on DC1-DTLZ3
and LIR-CMOP11.
and DSOCOL1, demonstrating that the performance of CSO
operator can be effectively enhanced by further improving
the winner groups through Eqs. (5) and (6). Likewise, the
convergence rate of DSOCOL3 without the COL strategy
deteriorated significantly and was markedly lower than those
of DSOCOL, DSOCOL1, and DSOCOL2, which incorporated
the COL strategy. These results confirmed that the COL strat-
egy can successfully capture promising evolutionary directions
and accelerate population convergence toward the CPF.
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Evaluations 105
50
100
150
200
250
300
350IGD
IGD convergence on LIR-CMOP10 (D = 1000)
DSOCOL4
DSOCOL5
DSOCOL
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Evaluations 105
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000IGD
IGD convergence on DC3-DTLZ1 (D = 1000)
DSOCOL4
DSOCOL5
DSOCOL
Fig. 5. Convergence results of DSOCOL and DSOCOL4-5 on LIR-CMOP10
and DC3-DTLZ1.
To further investigate the effectiveness and respective roles
of trend learning and orthogonal learning in the COL strat-
egy, Figs. 5 and 6 are presented for detailed analysis. As
shown in Fig. 5, DSOCOL4, which excludes trend learn-
ing component, exhibited a significantly slower convergence
speed than DSOCOL5 and DSOCOL, both of which incorpo-
rated trend learning. Moreover, DSOCOL converged slightly
slower than DSOCOL5 on these two problems. This was
because DSOCOL allocated part of the function evaluations
to orthogonal learning in order to explore complementary
search regions, whereas DSOCOL5 focused entirely on trend
learning. These results indicated that trend learning is able
to identify promising evolutionary directions, thereby accel-
erating the convergence toward the CPF. Fig. 6 illustrated
the final populations obtained by DSOCOL5 and DSOCOL
on C-DTLZ2 and LIR-CMOP3. It could be observed that
both DSOCOL5 and DSOCOL, equipped with trend learning,
achieved similar convergence performance. However, the final
population achieved by DSOCOL, which additionally incor-
porated orthogonal learning, was noticeably more uniformly
distributed than that of DSOCOL5. This finding suggested
that orthogonal learning is capable of exploring search regions
complementary to those identified by trend learning, thereby
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 12 ---
12
enhancing the exploration of neighborhoods around exploited
areas and ultimately improving population diversity.
0
0 0
0.5
0.5 0.5
 f3
DSOCOL5 on C2-DTLZ2 (D = 1000)
 f1 f2
1
1 1
0
0 0
0.5 f3
DSOCOL on C2-DTLZ2 (D = 1000)
0.5 0.5
 f2  f1
1
1 1
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 f1
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3 f2
DSOCOL5 on LIR-CMOP4 (D = 1000)
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 f1
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4 f2
DSOCOL on LIR-CMOP4 (D = 1000)
Fig. 6. Populations obtained by DSOCOL5 and DSOCOL on C-DTLZ2 and
LIR-CMOP3.
Eventually, we conducted the Friedman test on two metrics
to further verify the necessity and effectiveness of the different
components of DSOCOL. Table IV displays the statistical
results, showing that DSOCOL always has the highest rank-
ings. The p-values were less than 0.05, which indicates that
DSOCOL is significantly better than these variants. There-
fore, the experimental results further verify the necessity
and effectiveness of the proposed NGSS strategy, the winner
group improvement mechanism, and the COL strategy. These
proposed methods ensure that the swarm can converge rapidly
toward the CPF while maintaining extensive exploration across
the entire objective space, thereby enhancing the algorithm’s
capability for a comprehensive search along the CPF.
TABLE IV
AVERAGE RANKINGS AND p-VALUES OF DSOCOL AND FIVE VARIANTS
BY THE FRIEDMAN TEST ON FOUR BENCHMARK SUITES WITH VARYING
SCALES .
Algorithm IGD Ranking p-value HV Ranking p-value
DSOCOL1 3.5909 0.000217 3.2955 0.040652
DSOCOL2 3.5682 0.000285 3.4773 0.009178
DSOCOL3 3.6894 0.000063 3.9773 0.000035
DSOCOL4 4.6667 0.000000 4.5985 0.000000
DSOCOL5 3.0985 0.028769 3.0227 0.226421
DSOCOL 2.3864 2.6288
In addition, it is worth noting that DSOCOL4 obtained
a worse ranking than DSOCOL3. Although DSOCOL3 did
not incorporate the COL strategy, it was still able to achieve
gradual convergence by relying on the environmental selection
mechanism. In contrast, the COL strategy in DSOCOL4 only
included orthogonal learning without trend learning, which
caused the population to consume additional function evalua-
tions to explore complementary regions via orthogonal learn-
ing when it was unable to converge rapidly toward the CPF.
Under such slow convergence conditions, further intensifying
the exploration of complementary regions to enhance diversity
became detrimental to overall performance, ultimately leading
DSOCOL4 to achieve the worst ranking among the compared
variants. This result also indirectly verified that the search
directions explored by orthogonal learning are different from
and complementary to the evolutionary directions identified
by trend learning for rapid convergence, indicating that the
COL strategy can achieve its best performance only when
orthogonal learning and trend learning operate in a coordinated
manner to properly balance convergence and diversity.
D. Parameter Analysis
DSOCOL involves two parameters: the execution frequency
of the COL strategy ( TCOL) and the number of niches ( K).
Detailed statistical results for IGD and HV are provided in
Table S-XIII and S-XIV of the Supplementary Files. In this
study, TCOL and K are set to 75 and ⌊ N
10 ⌋, respectively. Due
to space limitations, a detailed analysis regarding the charac-
teristics and sensitivity of these two parameters is provided in
Supp-Section V of the Supplementary Files.
E. Real-World Application
In contrast to the previous benchmark suite instances, real-
world CMOPs (RWCMOPs) show distinct characteristics. To
evaluate DSOCOL’s performance in practical applications, we
further compared the performance of DSOCOL with the nine
comparison algorithms in ten real-world applications in four
different domains, which are as follows.
• Mechanical Design Problem: Pressure Vessel De-
sign [53], Four Bar Plane Truss [54], Front Rail Design
[55].
• Chemical Engineering Problems: Heat Exchanger Net-
work Design [56], Reactor Network Design [57].
• Process and Synthesis Problems: Process Design Prob-
lem [58], Process Synthesis Problem [59], Process Flow
Sheeting Problem [60].
• Power Electronics Problems: Synchronous Optimal
Pulse-width Modulation of 3-level Inverters [61], Syn-
chronous Optimal Pulse-width Modulation of 7-level In-
verters [62].
Since the true CPFs of these real-world applications are not
known, we use the HV indicator to measure the performance
of CMOEAs. Compared to the previous benchmark instances,
these RWCMOPs are more challenging in several respects.
First, the objective functions in practical problems may exhibit
significantly different numerical scales, making it difficult for
an algorithm to establish a credible boundary without sufficient
convergence pressure. Second, these applications may involve
highly nonlinear constraints and irregular Pareto front, under
which the population can easily be trapped in local feasible
regions or even fail to obtain feasible solutions. Third, some
real-world problems are also associated with large or strongly
coupled search spaces, which further increases the difficulty of
locating high-quality feasible regions efficiently. Under such
conditions, the advantage of DSOCOL lies in its ability to
simultaneously ensure convergence reliability and distribution
quality. Specifically, the COL strategy enables the main swarm
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 13 ---
13
TABLE V
THE MEDIAN HV RESULTS OBTAINED BY DSOCOL AND ALL COMPARISON ALGORITHMS ON TEN RWCMOP S AMONG 30 RUNS . T HE BEST RESULT IN
EACH ROW IS HIGHLIGHTED .
Problem APSEA C3M CMOEMT DRLOS-EMCMO IM-C-MOEA/D CMOCSO DVCEA LCMEA POCEA DSOCOL
Pressure Vessel Design 6.0454e-1 (9.59e-4)− 6.0138e-1 (2.68e-3)− 5.9416e-1 (2.07e-3)− 6.0514e-1 (9.75e-4)− 5.8511e-1 (6.09e-3)− 5.4646e-1 (4.50e-2)− 6.0601e-1 (3.80e-4)≈ 6.0205e-1 (2.11e-3)− 5.8100e-1 (7.75e-3)− 6.0603e-1(8.24e-4)Four Bar Plane Truss 4.0936e-1 (1.75e-4)− 4.0956e-1 (1.29e-4)− 4.0943e-1 (1.13e-4)− 4.0972e-1 (8.71e-5)≈ 4.0196e-1 (1.84e-3)− 4.0962e-1 (1.27e-4)− 4.0939e-1 (1.59e-4)− 4.1020e-1(1.02e-4)+ 3.3625e-1 (1.22e-2)− 4.0970e-1 (7.78e-5)Front Rail Design 4.0505e-2 (5.44e-6)≈ 4.0508e-2 (4.01e-6)≈ 4.0509e-2 (4.59e-6)≈ 4.0504e-2 (6.29e-6)≈ 3.9969e-2 (2.10e-4)− 4.0508e-2 (5.64e-6)≈ 4.0506e-2 (1.52e-5)≈ 4.0492e-2 (3.38e-5)≈ 4.0323e-2 (5.99e-5)− 4.0510e-2(4.57e-6)
Heat Exchanger Nwteork Design NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− 1.0000e+0 (0.00e+0)− 8.3095e-1 (3.37e-1)− 2.0000e-1 (4.47e-1)− 5.0364e+4(7.12e+4)Reactor Network Design NaN (NaN)− 1.8758e+0 (3.50e+0)≈ 9.9451e-1 (9.19e-3)≈ 8.3152e-1 (2.51e-1)− NaN (NaN)− 9.9856e-1 (0.00e+0)≈ 9.3315e-1 (7.21e-2)− 7.0574e-1 (2.92e-1)− 1.0365e+0 (1.56e-1)− 3.4847e+0(6.12e+0)
Process Design Problem 1.3839e-1 (2.77e-2)≈ 1.4523e-1 (6.23e-3)+ 1.4802e-1 (2.67e-2)≈ 1.4537e-1 (1.03e-2)+ 1.8376e-1(2.07e-2)+ 9.8472e-2 (1.35e-2)− 1.3715e-1 (1.09e-2)≈ 1.2306e-1 (2.81e-2)− 1.3076e-1 (3.21e-2)≈ 1.3543e-1 (1.63e-2)Process Synthesis Problem 7.6198e-1 (1.93e-2)− 7.6952e-1 (7.32e-3)− 7.5167e-1 (2.88e-2)− 7.72851e-1 (4.96e-3)− 6.9682e-1 (1.00e-1)− 6.2336e-1 (5.38e-2)− 7.8209e-1 (2.69e-3)≈ 7.2110e-1 (7.74e-2)− 3.3347e-1 (2.35e-1)− 7.8294e-1(2.19e-3)Process Flow Sheeting Problem 7.6198e-1 (1.93e-2)− 7.6952e-1 (7.32e-3)− 7.5167e-1 (2.88e-2)− 7.7851e-1 (4.96e-3)− 6.9682e-1 (1.00e-1)− 6.2336e-1 (5.38e-2)− 7.8209e-1 (2.69e-3)− 7.2110e-1 (7.74e-2)− 3.3347e-1 (2.35e-1)− 7.8606e-1(1.17e-3)
Synchronous Optimal Pulse-width Modulation of 3-level Inverters NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− 1.8821e-1 (1.95e-1)≈ NaN (NaN)− NaN (NaN)− 4.8626e-1(3.10e-1)Synchronous Optimal Pulse-width Modulation of 7-level Inverters7.7564e-1(4.57e-2)+ 5.9497e-1 (2.33e-1)≈ 6.6799e-1 (2.22e-1)+ 7.6749e-1 (5.34e-2)+ 6.0888e-1 (3.05e-1)≈ 5.6533e-1 (3.54e-1)≈ 7.6420e-1 (5.20e-2)+ 5.4489e-1 (1.60e-1)≈ 2.9724e-1 (3.10e-1)− 4.9731e-1 (1.74e-1)+/−/≈ 1/7/2 1/6/3 1/6/3 2/6/2 1/8/1 0/7/3 1/4/5 1/7/2 0/9/1“NaN (NaN)” indicates that the algorithm failed to find any feasible solution across 30 independent runs.
to learn promising evolutionary directions and maintain suf-
ficient convergence pressure to approach a reliable objective
boundary, while the auxiliary swarm explores complementary
subspaces to reduce redundant search. In addition, the NGSS
strategy helps preserve uniformity in the objective space,
which is particularly important when the practical Pareto front
is irregular or partially disconnected. As shown in Table V, our
proposed method achieves the overall highest quality results in
these practical applications, with DVCEA following closely.
The results validate that DSOCOL successfully maintains a
balance between convergence, feasibility, and diversity, even
in the context of RWCMOPs. In general, the superior or
competitive performance of DSOCOL in solving real-world
applications is demonstrated, compared with other methods.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a dual-swarm evolutionary al-
gorithm with collaborative orthogonal learning, named DSO-
COL, to effectively balance feasibility, convergence and diver-
sity in constrained multi-objective optimization with complex
landscapes. Unlike conventional collaborative frameworks that
primarily exchange solution coordinates, DSOCOL incorpo-
rates evolutionary direction learning into the collaborative
paradigm. The main swarm identifies promising convergence
directions and transfers them as reusable search experience to
the auxiliary swarm, enabling rapid convergence toward the
CPF and achieving uniform search of the CPF. The primary
contribution is the geometric synergy between trend learning
and orthogonal learning. Specifically, trend learning drives
rapid convergence toward the CPF, whereas orthogonal learn-
ing explores the orthogonal complement of the convergence
direction, thereby reducing redundant searches and broaden-
ing the solution distribution. Moreover, the proposed NGSS
strategy employs a three-level subset division mechanism to
enable the preferential exploration of sparse niches, ensuring
uniform distribution within the objective space.
Extensive results on 33 benchmark instances and 10 real-
world problems demonstrate significant improvements in both
convergence and distribution, including large-scale cases. In
practical applications such as pressure vessel design and reac-
tor network design, DSOCOL provides decision-makers with a
well-converged and well-distributed set of trade-off solutions,
facilitating more informed trade-off decisions in real-world
cases with nonlinear constraints. Despite these advancements,
extending the collaborative learning paradigm to constrained
many-objective optimization problems (CMaOPs, M > 3)
remains challenging, as traditional Pareto dominance-based
selection mechanisms perform poorly in this scenario. Future
research will investigate performing orthogonal searches on
Cartesian products to address the exponential growth in the
cardinality of non-dominated solution sets in CMaOPs [63].
By reducing the challenge from an exponential to a polynomial
complexity, it is promising to expand DSOCOL into CMaOPs.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Li, L. Wang, H. Sang, and L. Yao, “Knowledge-guided multiview
hierarchical evolutionary algorithm for flexible job shop scheduling
with finite skilled workers,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 7259–7272, 2025.
[2] Y . Shan, X.-P. Xie, and Z. Mao, “Co-design of a switching-type
control scheme for nonlinear networked systems with protocol-based
communication and its application to circuits,” IEEE Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 22, pp. 5828–5840, 2025.
[3] T. Zhang, D. Li, Y . Li, and W. Gong, “Constrained multitasking
optimization via co-evolution and domain adaptation,” Swarm and
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 87, p. 101570, 2024.
[4] F. Ming, W. Gong, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and Y . Jin, “Automated con-
figuration of evolutionary algorithms via deep reinforcement learning
for constrained multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 5877–5890, 2025.
[5] J. Liu, Y . Wang, G. Sun, and T. Pang, “Constrained evolutionary
bayesian optimization for expensive constrained optimization problems
with inequality constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 2009–2021, 2025.
[6] K. Yu, F. Chen, M. Yu, J. Liang, and K. Chen, “Modal detection
informed classification evaluation via ensemble networks for expensive
constrained multimodal optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems , pp. 1–15, 2025.
[7] H. Wu, Q. Chen, J. Chen, Y . Jin, J. Ding, X. Zhang, and T. Chai, “A
multistage expensive constrained multiobjective optimization algorithm
based on ensemble infill criterion,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2357–2371, 2025.
[8] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
[9] Q. Zhu, Q. Zhang, and Q. Lin, “A constrained multiobjective evolution-
ary algorithm with detect-and-escape strategy,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 938–947, Oct. 2020.
[10] Z. Fan, H. Li, C. Wei, W. Li, H. Huang, X. Cai, and Z. Cai, “An
improved epsilon constraint handling method embedded in moea/d
for constrained multi-objective optimization problems,” in 2016 IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI) , 2016, pp. 1–8.
[11] F. Ming, W. Gong, L. Wang, and L. Gao, “Constrained multiobjective
optimization via multitasking and knowledge transfer,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 77–89, 2024.
[12] Z. Sun, H. Ren, G. G. Yen, T. Chen, J. Wu, H. An, and J. Yang,
“An evolutionary algorithm with constraint relaxation strategy for highly
constrained multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cyber-
netics, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3190–3204, 2023.
[13] K. Qiao, K. Yu, B. Qu, J. Liang, H. Song, and C. Yue, “An evolutionary
multitasking optimization framework for constrained multiobjective op-
timization problems,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation ,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 263–277, 2022.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 14 ---
14
[14] J. Wang, G. Liang, and J. Zhang, “Cooperative differential evolution
framework for constrained multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cybernetics , vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2060–2072, 2019.
[15] Z. Fan, W. Li, X. Cai, H. Li, C. Wei, Q. Zhang, K. Deb, and E. Goodman,
“Push and pull search for solving constrained multi-objective optimiza-
tion problems,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, vol. 44, pp. 665–
679, 2019.
[16] W.-Q. Ying, W.-P. He, Y .-X. Huang, D.-T. Li, and Y . Wu, “An adaptive
stochastic ranking mechanism in moea/d for constrained multi-objective
optimization,” in 2016 International Conference on Information System
and Artificial Intelligence (ISAI) , 2016, pp. 514–518.
[17] M. A. Jan and R. A. Khanum, “A study of two penalty-parameterless
constraint handling techniques in the framework of moea/d,” Applied
Soft Computing, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 128–148, 2013.
[18] Q. Gu, Q. Wang, N. N. Xiong, S. Jiang, and L. Chen, “Surrogate-assisted
evolutionary algorithm for expensive constrained multi-objective discrete
optimization problems,” Complex & Intelligent Systems, vol. 8, pp. 2699
– 2718, 2021.
[19] Z.-Z. Liu, Y . Wang, and B.-C. Wang, “Indicator-based constrained
multiobjective evolutionary algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 5414–5426, 2021.
[20] Z. Ma and Y . Wang, “Shift-based penalty for evolutionary constrained
multiobjective optimization and its application,” IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 18–30, 2023.
[21] L. Jiao, J. Luo, R. Shang, and F. Liu, “A modified objective func-
tion method with feasible-guiding strategy to solve constrained multi-
objective optimization problems,” Applied Soft Computing , vol. 14, pp.
363–380, 2014.
[22] K. Yu, J. Liang, B. Qu, Y . Luo, and C. Yue, “Dynamic selection
preference-assisted constrained multiobjective differential evolution,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 52,
no. 5, pp. 2954–2965, 2022.
[23] F. Vaz, Y . Lavinas, C. Aranha, and M. Ladeira, “Exploring constraint
handling techniques in real-world problems on moea/d with limited
budget of evaluations,” in Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization ,
H. Ishibuchi, Q. Zhang, R. Cheng, K. Li, H. Li, H. Wang, and A. Zhou,
Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 555–566.
[24] Y . Tian, Y . Zhang, Y . Su, X. Zhang, K. C. Tan, and Y . Jin, “Balancing
objective optimization and constraint satisfaction in constrained evolu-
tionary multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 9559–9572, 2022.
[25] Y . Xiang, X. Yang, H. Huang, and J. Wang, “Balancing constraints and
objectives by considering problem types in constrained multiobjective
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 53, no. 1, pp.
88–101, 2023.
[26] B. Liu, H. Ma, X. Zhang, and Y . Zhou, “A memetic co-evolutionary
differential evolution algorithm for constrained optimization,” in 2007
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , 2007, pp. 2996–3002.
[27] Y . Yang, J. Liu, and S. Tan, “A partition-based constrained multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computa-
tion, vol. 66, p. 100940, 2021.
[28] F. Ming, W. Gong, D. Li, L. Wang, and L. Gao, “A competitive and
cooperative swarm optimizer for constrained multiobjective optimization
problems,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 27,
no. 5, pp. 1313–1326, 2023.
[29] X. Yu, X. Yu, Y . Lu, G. G. Yen, and M. Cai, “Differential evolution mu-
tation operators for constrained multi-objective optimization,” Applied
Soft Computing, vol. 67, pp. 452–466, 2018.
[30] F. Ming, W. Gong, L. Wang, and Y . Jin, “Constrained multi-objective op-
timization with deep reinforcement learning assisted operator selection,”
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 919–931,
2024.
[31] M. Miyakawa, K. Takadama, and H. Sato, “Directed mating using
inverted pbi function for constrained multi-objective optimization,” in
2015 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , 2015, pp.
2929–2936.
[32] C. He, R. Cheng, Y . Tian, X. Zhang, K. C. Tan, and Y . Jin, “Paired
offspring generation for constrained large-scale multiobjective optimiza-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 448–462, 2021.
[33] A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, and L. Feng, “Insights on transfer optimization:
Because experience is the best teacher,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 51–64, 2018.
[34] K. Qiao, K. Yu, B. Qu, J. Liang, H. Song, C. Yue, H. Lin, and
K. C. Tan, “Dynamic auxiliary task-based evolutionary multitasking
for constrained multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 642–656, 2023.
[35] E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele, “Spea2: Improving the strength
pareto evolutionary algorithm,” TIK-Report, vol. 103, 07 2001.
[36] R. Cheng and Y . Jin, “A competitive swarm optimizer for large scale
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 45, no. 2, pp.
191–204, 2015.
[37] K. Qiao, J. Liang, K. Yu, X. Ban, C. Yue, B. Qu, and P. N. Suganthan,
“Constraints separation based evolutionary multitasking for constrained
multi-objective optimization problems,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automat-
ica Sinica, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1819–1835, 2024.
[38] Z. Fan, W. Li, X. Cai, H. Li, C. Wei, Q. Zhang, K. Deb, and E. Good-
man, “Difficulty adjustable and scalable constrained multiobjective test
problem toolkit,” Evolutionary Computation, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 339–378,
2020.
[39] H. Jain and K. Deb, “An evolutionary many-objective optimization
algorithm using reference-point based nondominated sorting approach,
part ii: Handling constraints and extending to an adaptive approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
602–622, 2014.
[40] K. Li, R. Chen, G. Fu, and X. Yao, “Two-archive evolutionary algorithm
for constrained multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 303–315, 2019.
[41] Z. Fan, W. Li, X. Cai, H. Huang, Y . Fang, Y . Yugen, J. Mo, C. Wei,
and E. Goodman, “An improved epsilon constraint-handling method
in moea/d for cmops with large infeasible regions,” Soft Computing ,
vol. 23, pp. 12 491–12 510, 2019.
[42] J. Yuan, H. Liu, Y .-S. Ong, and Z. He, “Indicator-based evolutionary
algorithm for solving constrained multiobjective optimization problems,”
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 26, no. 2, pp.
379–391, 2022.
[43] Y . Tian, R. Cheng, X. Zhang, and Y . Jin, “PlatEMO: A MATLAB
platform for evolutionary multi-objective optimization,” IEEE Compu-
tational Intelligence Magazine , vol. 12, pp. 73–87, 11 2017.
[44] Y . Tian, R. Wang, Y . Zhang, and X. Zhang, “Adaptive population sizing
for multi-population based constrained multi-objective optimization,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 621, p. 129296, 2025.
[45] R. Sun, J. Zou, Y . Liu, S. Yang, and J. Zheng, “A multistage algorithm
for solving multiobjective optimization problems with multiconstraints,”
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 27, no. 5, pp.
1207–1219, 2023.
[46] L. R. C. de Farias and A. F. R. Araújo, “An inverse
modeling constrained multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based
on decomposition,” 2024 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 3727–3732, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273638540
[47] X. Ban, J. Liang, K. Qiao, K. Yu, Y . Wang, J. Peng, and B. Qu,
“A decision variables classification-based evolutionary algorithm for
constrained multi-objective optimization problems,” IEEE/CAA Journal
of Automatica Sinica , vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1830–1849, 2025.
[48] L. Si, X. Zhang, Y . Zhang, S. Yang, and Y . Tian, “An efficient sampling
approach to offspring generation for evolutionary large-scale constrained
multi-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in
Computational Intelligence, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2080–2092, 2025.
[49] K. Deb, R. B. Agrawal et al., “Simulated binary crossover for continuous
search space,” Complex systems, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 115–148, 1995.
[50] P. Bosman and D. Thierens, “The balance between proximity and
diversity in multiobjective evolutionary algorithms,” IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 174–188, 2003.
[51] E. Zitzler and L. Thiele, “Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: a com-
parative case study and the strength pareto approach,”IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 257–271, 1999.
[52] J. Alcalá-Fdez, L. Sánchez, S. García, M. J. del Jesus, S. Ventura, J. M.
Garrell, J. Otero, C. Romero, J. Bacardit, V . M. Rivas, J. C. Fernán-
dez, and F. Herrera, “KEEL: A software tool to assess evolutionary
algorithms for data mining problems,” Soft Comput., vol. 13, no. 3, pp.
307–318, 2009.
[53] B. Kannan and S. N. Kramer, “An augmented lagrange multiplier
based method for mixed integer discrete continuous optimization and
its applications to mechanical design,” Journal of mechanical design ,
vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 405–411, 1994.
[54] F. Y . Cheng and X. S. Li, “A generalized center method for multiobjec-
tive optimization,” 1997.
[55] L. Fan, T. Yoshino, T. Xu, Y . Lin, and H. Liu, “A novel hybrid algo-
rithm for solving multiobjective optimization problems with engineering
applications,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering , vol. 2018, no. 1,
p. 5316379, 2018.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Page 15 ---
15
[56] G. Guillén-Gosálbez, “A novel milp-based objective reduction method
for multi-objective optimization: Application to environmental prob-
lems,” Computers & Chemical Engineering , vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1469–
1477, 2011.
[57] H. Ryoo and N. Sahinidis, “Global optimization of nonconvex nlps and
minlps with applications in process design,” Computers & Chemical
Engineering, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 551–566, 1995.
[58] G. R. Kocis and I. E. Grossmann, “Global optimization of nonconvex
mixed-integer nonlinear programming (minlp) problems in process syn-
thesis,” Industrial & engineering chemistry research , vol. 27, no. 8, pp.
1407–1421, 1988.
[59] G. Kocis and I. Grossmann, “A modelling and decomposition strategy for
the minlp optimization of process flowsheets,” Computers & Chemical
Engineering, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 797–819, 1989.
[60] C. A. Floudas, Nonlinear and Mixed-Integer Optimization: Fundamen-
tals and Applications . Oxford University Press, 11 1995.
[61] A. K. Rathore, J. Holtz, and T. Boller, “Synchronous optimal pulsewidth
modulation for low-switching-frequency control of medium-voltage mul-
tilevel inverters,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 57,
no. 7, pp. 2374–2381, 2010.
[62] A. Edpuganti and A. K. Rathore, “Fundamental switching frequency
optimal pulsewidth modulation of medium-voltage cascaded seven-level
inverter,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications , vol. 51, no. 4,
pp. 3485–3492, 2015.
[63] S. Y . Zeng, L. S. Kang, and L. X. Ding, “An orthogonal multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm for multi-objective optimization problems with
constraints,” Evolutionary Computation, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 77–98, 2004.
Yubo Wang received the B.Sc. degree in com-
puter science from South-Central Minzu University,
Wuhan, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in computer science with the School of
Computer Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China.
His current research interests include evolution-
ary multiobjective optimization methods, and their
applications.
Chengyu Hu received his M.S. degree in automation
and control from Wuhan University of Technology
in 2003 and his Ph.D. in automation control from
Huazhong University of Science and Technology in
2010. He is currently a professor and vice dean at
the School of Computer Science, China University
of Geosciences, Wuhan, China. His research inter-
ests include evolutionary algorithms, reinforcement
learning, and cloud computing.
Xinyi Wu received the B.Sc. degree from Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 2019 and M.Sc. degree
from New York University. She is currently pursu-
ing the Ph.D. degree in computer science with the
School of Computer Science, China University of
Geosciences, Wuhan, China.
Her current research interests include evolutionary
multimodal and multiobjective optimization meth-
ods, and their applications.
Tingyu Zhang received the B.Sc. degree in com-
puter science from Wuhan Institute of Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in computer science with the School of
Computer Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China.
His current research interests include evolutionary
multitask optimization, evolutionary multiobjective
optimization, and their applications.
Wenyin Gong (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Eng., M.Eng., and Ph.D. degrees in com-
puter science from China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China, in 2004, 2007, and 2010, respec-
tively.
He is currently a Professor with School of Com-
puter Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China. His research interests include evo-
lutionary algorithms, evolutionary optimization, and
their applications. He has published over 100 re-
search papers in journals and international confer-
ences.
He served as a referee for over 30 international journals, such as IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION , IEEE T RANSAC -
TIONS ON CYBERNETICS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , M AN, AND
CYBERNETICS : SYSTEMS , IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Information Sciences ,
European Journal of Operational Research, Applied Soft Computing, Journal
of Power Sources , etc. Professor Gong currently serves as Associate Editor
of Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , Expert Systems with Applications ,
Memetic Computing, etc.
Xuesong Yan received the B.Eng and M.Eng de-
grees in computer science from the China University
of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, in 2000, and 2003,
respectively, and his Ph.D. degree in computer soft-
ware and theory from Wuhan University in 2006.
He is currently a Professor in the School of
Computer Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China. His research interests include intelli-
gent optimization, artificial intelligence, and big data
and its application.
Liang Gao (Senior Member, IEEE) received his
B.Sc. degree in mechatronic engineering from Xid-
ian University, Xi an, China, in 1996, and the Ph.D.
degree in mechatronic engineering from Huazhong
University of Science and Technology (HUST),
Wuhan, China, in 2002.
He is a Professor of the Department of Industrial
and Manufacturing Systems Engineering (IMSE),
the Deputy Director of State Key Laboratory of
Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology
and Chairman of School of Mechanical Science and
Engineering, HUST. He was supported by the Program for New Century
Excellent Talents in University in 2008 and National Science Fund for
Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2018. His research interests
include intelligent optimization algorithms, big data, deep learning with theirs
application in Design & Manufacturing. He published more than 450 papers
indexed by SCIE, authored 13 monographs.
Professor Gao currently serves as co-Editor-in-Chief of IET Collaborative
Intelligent Manufacturing , Associate Editor of Swarm and Evolutionary
Computation, Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering , etc.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2026.3700184
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2026 at 07:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 